Hello and welcome.
In this video we'll be deriving the quadratic formula with a geometric focus.
Of course naturally we'll have to do some algebra, but I hope that at the end of this
video, you'll also have a good geometric understanding.
To start with, we'll be working with the real numbers, or if you want, the complex numbers.
What this means is that we're going to have all of the coefficients to be real or complex numbers.
We will not be going into the complexity of this or talk about the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.

So, let's start. In particular, what is the quadratic formula?
It's a polynomial where the degree is two.
The general format is ax^2 + bx + c.
Note that we can always make polynomials equal to zero.

The goal is to derive the quadratic formula.
To do this, let's first analyze what the quadratic polynomial represents.
First, the real number c is just a number.
It can represent anything: a line, position in space, or area.
Literally anything, which is the beauty of mathematics.
In particular, let's just say it's the area of some polygon.

Next, let's look at what bx represents.
Well, remember that bx is b times x which is a rectangle of length b and width x.
Now, let's look at the more complicated one, ax^2.
Recall that every real number, if we square the square root of itself, we get back the number.
In particular, we have that ax^2 is actually (sqrt{a}x)(sqrt{a}x).
Which, now we know is a square with sides sqrt{a}x.

Now that we have a geometric understanding of what the quadratic polynomial represents.
Let's analyze the square that has a side length of x+k.
That is, (x+k)^2.
Let's separate the x+k respectively which gives us this partition of the square.
We now have two squares, one with sides x and the other with sides k, and the two
rectangles of length k and width x.
Algebraically, this looks like this.

With this identity, we want to force our quadratic polynomial to mimic this construction.
So back to our general case, we note that we can always divide by the leading coefficient a
giving us this new form given a isn't zero.
Looking at this, we see clearly that the constant c/a isn't the square of the second coefficient.
Thus, we'll simply move it to the other side of the equation.
This is where we get to the tricky part.
The identity that we looked at before, we saw that the second coefficient must multiply by 2.
We want to artificially add this two in and we do this by multiplying by 1.
Note that any number divided by itself is 1, so actually, we are multiplying it by 2/2.
Thus, our form now looks like this.
Geometrically, what we have now is a square with sides x and two rectangles with length b/2a and width x.
Here we want to make this shape into a square, that is, we complete the square.
Thus, we add in the square with sides b/2a.
Algebraically, we have this.

Now that we have a square, we can represent our polynomial as square.
From here, we now start doing some good ol' algebra.
First we reduce the RHS, take the square root and then isolate the x.
And voila we are done.
